README.md, before:

# PERN Final Project Template

- select `use this template`
- clone this repo

## Getting Started


### Project Structure

```
├── README.md (what you are currently reading)
├── back-end (a basic express app)
├── front-end (a basic create-react-app)
└── package.json (necessary boilerplate for heroku deployment )
```

**NOTE:** - You will have 3 `package.json` files in this project

- **Top level** - necessary for heroku deployment: you don't need to do anything with this file, it is set up for you
- **back-end** - everything to do with the express/postgres backend
- **front-end** - everything to do with the create-react-app front-end

### `back-end` Set Up and Deployment to Heroku

#### Basic App

**/back-end**

- `cd back-end`
- `npm install`
- `touch .env`

make sure you are on the same level as the `package.json` of the `back-end` directory

- `touch .env`

```
PORT=3333
PG_HOST=localhost
PG_PORT=5432
PG_DATABASE=postgres
PG_USER=postgres
PG_PASSWORD=""
```

- `npm run db_init`
- `npm run db_seed`

Test app locally. If it does not work locally, it will not work on Heroku.

Fix bugs.

When ready:

- `heroku create`
- `git add .`
- `git commit -m 'heroku deployment`
- `git push heroku main` - if this does not work, go to heroku dashboard => deployment and add the remote

ie `heroku git:remote -a <your-heroku-app-name>`

Open your heroku app. You should see the `Hello, world!` message.

#### Adding the Database on Heroku

In the heroku dashboard, go to `Overview` choose `configure add ons`

In the search bar `Quickly add add-ons` - search for `postgres` - choose `heroku postgres`

- Choose hobby dev
- Note: even though hobby dev is free, you may be required to provide a credit card
- In new view, click on `heroku Postgres / attached as DATABASE` => Settings

![](./assets/heroku-database-dash.png)

You will need to make these key value pairs in your heroku app

**IMPORTANT**
The `keys` must match perfectly with what is in your `db/dbConfig.js` file and your local `.env`

- Open a new tab/window and go to the main page of your heroku app choose settings
- Reveal Config Variables
- Add the variables

**Note:** these are false credentials and given for example only:

```
PG_HOST=ec2-55-227-246-76.compute-1.amazonaws.com
PG_PORT=5432
PG_DATABASE=d9bq2bk2s4ilde
PG_USER=bcwmtakzkmkdxr
PG_PASSWORD=afb0a7a9396af1bac763154f5649e049ce280658bef0ded7efde6
```

![](./assets/heroku-config-vars.png)

- make sure you are on the same directory level as your `package.json` of your `back-end` directory

Go back to the heroku database view => settings

- copy `Heroku CLI` (something like `heroku pg:psql postgresql-shaped-11685 --app mysterious-spires-49488`)
- paste into your terminal

- it should open a `pg shell`

Run the following:

- `\i ./db/schema.sql`
  - success should say `CREATE TABLE`
- `\i ./db/seed.sql`
  - success should say `INSERT 0 7`
- `\q`

This will insert the test table with the days of the week.

Later, when you have build out your app to have your schema and seed data, you will:

- edit the `db/schema.sql` file to be your own
- edit th `db/seed.sql` file to be your own
- reopen this shell and rerun these commands.

Note you should set up the

### `front-end` Set Up

**/front-end**

- `cd front-end`
- `npm install`

- `npm start`

**src/util/apiURL.js**

Replace the placeholder heroku app with your heroku app URL that you set up earlier

Make sure your back-end is still running. You should see an unordered list of the days of the week, coming from your back-end. If it does not work locally, it will not work when it is deployed. Keep debugging until it works

Go to netlify, choose `New site from Git`

- choose continuos deployment, GitHub.
- configure the netlify app on GitHub

Follow the prompts to add this project repo to Netlify
Once, authorized, configure to launch app from

- Base directory: `front-end`
- Build command: `npm run build`
- Publish directory: `build` (may appear as `front-end/build`)

![](./assets/netlify-deploy-settings.png)

Commit message:

udpated Heroku config for psql

README.md, after:

# PERN Final Project Template

- select `use this template`
- clone this repo

## Getting Started

### Project Structure

```
├── README.md (what you are currently reading)
├── back-end (a basic express app)
├── front-end (a basic create-react-app)
└── package.json (necessary boilerplate for heroku deployment )
```

**NOTE:** - You will have 3 `package.json` files in this project

- **Top level** - necessary for heroku deployment: you don't need to do anything with this file, it is set up for you
- **back-end** - everything to do with the express/postgres backend
- **front-end** - everything to do with the create-react-app front-end

### `back-end` Set Up and Deployment to Heroku

#### Basic App

**/back-end**

- `cd back-end`
- `npm install`
- `touch .env`

make sure you are on the same level as the `package.json` of the `back-end` directory

- `touch .env`

```
PORT=3333
PG_HOST=localhost
PG_PORT=5432
PG_DATABASE=postgres
PG_USER=postgres
PG_PASSWORD=""
```

- `npm run db_init`
- `npm run db_seed`

Test app locally. If it does not work locally, it will not work on Heroku.

Fix bugs.

When ready:

- `heroku create`
- `git add .`
- `git commit -m 'heroku deployment`
- `git push heroku main` - if this does not work, go to heroku dashboard => deployment and add the remote

ie `heroku git:remote -a <your-heroku-app-name>`

Open your heroku app. You should see the `Hello, world!` message.

#### Adding the Database on Heroku

In the heroku dashboard, go to `Overview` choose `configure add ons`

In the search bar `Quickly add add-ons` - search for `postgres` - choose `heroku postgres`

- Choose hobby dev
- Note: even though hobby dev is free, you may be required to provide a credit card
- In new view, click on `heroku Postgres / attached as DATABASE` => Settings

![](./assets/heroku-database-dash.png)

You will need to make these key value pairs in your heroku app

**IMPORTANT**
The `keys` must match perfectly with what is in your `db/dbConfig.js` file and your local `.env`

- Open a new tab/window and go to the main page of your heroku app choose settings
- Reveal Config Variables
- Add the variables

**Note:** these are false credentials and given for example only:

```
PG_HOST=ec2-55-227-246-76.compute-1.amazonaws.com
PG_PORT=5432
PG_DATABASE=d9bq2bk2s4ilde
PG_USER=bcwmtakzkmkdxr
PG_PASSWORD=afb0a7a9396af1bac763154f5649e049ce280658bef0ded7efde6
```

![](./assets/heroku-config-vars.png)

- make sure you are on the same directory level as your `package.json` of your `back-end` directory

Go back to the heroku database view => settings

- copy `Heroku CLI` (something like `heroku pg:psql postgresql-shaped-11685 --app mysterious-spires-49488`)
- paste into your terminal

- it should open a `pg shell`

Run the following:

- update the `\i ./db/prod_schema.sql` with the PG_DATABASE value from Heroku
- `\i ./db/prod_schema.sql`
  - success should say `CREATE TABLE`
- update the `\i ./db/prod_seed.sql` with the PG_DATABASE value from Herkou
- `\i ./db/prod_seed.sql`
  - success should say `INSERT 0 7`
- `\q`

This will insert the test table with the days of the week.

Later, when you have build out your app to have your schema and seed data, you will:

- edit the `db/schema.sql` file to be your own
- edit th `db/seed.sql` file to be your own
- reopen this shell and rerun these commands.

Note you should set up the

### `front-end` Set Up

**/front-end**

- `cd front-end`
- `npm install`

- `npm start`

**src/util/apiURL.js**

Replace the placeholder heroku app with your heroku app URL that you set up earlier

Make sure your back-end is still running. You should see an unordered list of the days of the week, coming from your back-end. If it does not work locally, it will not work when it is deployed. Keep debugging until it works

Go to netlify, choose `New site from Git`

- choose continuos deployment, GitHub.
- configure the netlify app on GitHub

Follow the prompts to add this project repo to Netlify
Once, authorized, configure to launch app from

- Base directory: `front-end`
- Build command: `npm run build`
- Publish directory: `build` (may appear as `front-end/build`)

![](./assets/netlify-deploy-settings.png)
